JUDY WOODRUFF: Coronavirus infections and
deaths are ripping through the Navajo Nation,
located on three different states.
With an already vulnerable population, coordinating
care and information is not easy.
As the "NewsHour"'s Stephanie Sy reports,
the community has taken on the challenge of
caring for their own people.
STEPHANIE SY: In Navajo country, COVID-19
found its grip at a religious revival event
in early March in the upper western reaches
of the reservation.
JONATHAN NEZ, President, Navajo Nation: We
have clan families that come all over the
Navajo Nation to participate in this event.
And, boy, it just took off like wildfire after
that.
STEPHANIE SY: After the so-called super spreader
event in Chilchinbito, President Jonathan
Nez put increasingly strict orders for social
distancing in place, including weekend curfews.
BECKY BIZAHALONI, Granddaughter: I haven't
even, personally myself, been able to hug
my grandma. Stand at the door, drop off all
the stuff on the porch, and I just wave at
her. That's it.
STEPHANIE SY: At least 52 people who live
on Navajo Nation have died from COVID-19,
including one of 18-year old welder Trevor
Tacheene's relatives.
TREVOR TACHEENE, Navajo Nation: One person
on the other side of my family has got it
and has passed.
I'm very concerned about it, because I have
family members that are young and are susceptible
to it. And it's scaring my mother and my father
every time we go out.
STEPHANIE SY: Getting the message out about
social distancing on the reservation was initially
difficult. Nez broadcasts updates daily on
Facebook, but many households lack quality
Internet access.
It's also not practical for many on the reservation
to follow stay-at-home orders. Sprawling across
three states with a population of more than
173,000, wide swathes of the Navajo Nation
are energy, food, and health care deserts,
and actual desert, with limited water.
DR. JEROME ADAMS, Surgeon General of the United
States: We tell them to wash their hands,
but a study showed 30 percent of the homes
on Navajo Nation don't have running water.
JONATHAN NEZ: You know, we're a vulnerable
population.
STEPHANIE SY: One in five Native Americans
has diabetes. And there's a high prevalence
of obesity, both underlying conditions that
can make COVID-19 particularly dangerous.
Even the younger people on Navajo Nation have
worse health outcomes.
DR. DIANA HU, Pediatrician, Navajo Nation:
We are seeing some patients that are not over
60 that are coming in with severe COVID illness,
because -- and they almost all have comorbid
conditions.
STEPHANIE SY: Dr. Diana Hu has been working
at the Tuba City Regional Health Care Center
for more than 30 years. The pediatric ward,
where she normally works, has been turned
into a respiratory clinic, as has much of
the hospital, since COVID-19 struck.
DR. DIANA HU: It was actually almost like
a tsunami when this first started in the middle
of March, where we had, you know, nine or
10 people getting sick and a day that had
to be flown out for tertiary care.
We get maybe one or two a day, and it's real
obvious when they're sick, unfortunately.
STEPHANIE SY: Many Native American hospitals
are not equipped for multiple severe ventilator
cases. For now, patients are airlifted to
facilities in Phoenix and Flagstaff.
But Dr. Hu and her colleagues are bracing
for an overwhelming surge.
DR. DIANA HU: If you know any nurses that
want to come work up here, we'd love to have
them.
STEPHANIE SY: This week, the University of
California-San Francisco, sent 14 nurses and
seven physicians to Navajo Nation to help.
The most pressing shortage has been personnel.
And this thing has not peaked on the Navajo
Nation.
DR. DIANA HU: We're not sure. If you look
at our statistics, which are per capita, it's
outrageous.
The biggest issue I think that we have with
the federal government structure, the coordination
is pitting tiny places like us against states,
against other hospitals. And the coordination
is being left up to the states, which is very
difficult when you have something like the
Navajo Nation.
STEPHANIE SY: Navajo Nation has one of the
highest rates in the country of COVID-19 on
a per capita basis, behind only New York and
New Jersey.
In Arizona, about 20 percent of deaths from
COVID-19 have been Native Americans, when
they make up only 5 percent of the state's
population. The CARES Act granted $8 billion
to stabilize tribal communities, but the more
than 500 sovereign tribes had collectively
asked for closer to $20 billion.
The Navajo have been the worst affected, but
other tribes are facing the same threat. In
New Mexico, multiple Native Pueblo communities
are seeing infection rates of coronavirus
higher than big cities.
And the Red Lake community in Minnesota declared
medical martial law several weeks ago, containing
their spread to one person.
Back on Navajo lands, President Nez described
the frustrating process of accessing federal
funds.
JONATHAN NEZ: It's taken too long. Here in
Indian country, we're always -- it seems to
me we're always at the bottom of the list
when it comes to federal resources.
STEPHANIE SY: The health disparities laid
bare by COVID-19 have reverberated across
the Navajo Nation since the time of European
colonization.
In 2009, the H1N1 flu was four times as deadly
in Native peoples as it was in the general
population. During the Spanish Flu pandemic
of 1918, a similar story.
DR. DIANA HU: We can't change history. We
should just hopefully learn from it.
STEPHANIE SY: In recent days, vital resources
have been delivered, rapid test kits that
President Nez says can give results in less
than an hour.
The National Guard has brought in supplies,
initially from its own stockpile of masks
and other protective gear. And people are
stepping up to fill the needs of their neighbors,
Navajo sewing masks for front-line workers.
JENNIFER JAMES, Navajo Designer: I delivered
some to Kayenta Health Center, and they have
been wanting more masks.
STEPHANIE SY: Navajo delivering supplies to
the most isolated residents.
SHANDIIN HERRERA, Community Organizer, Navajo
Nation: We definitely see the need to make
food and supplies like toilet paper and soap
available during this time.
KIM SMITH, Community Organizer, Navajo Nation:
We came across an elder who lives alone, and
he has no food. So we packed extra, so that
we're able to give, in case we run into this
type of situation.
STEPHANIE SY: And Navajo coming together in
shared struggle.
JONATHAN NEZ: We're encouraging our elders
to share their stories, the stories of our
culture, our tradition, and our language,
so that our young people don't remember this
time as a scary moment.
This is, in a way, what we have been praying
for, to reunite families, to reunite couples,
to hand down our language, our culture, tradition
to the next generation.
STEPHANIE SY: It may be an optimistic way
of looking at a pandemic, but it's the stories
the Navajo tell that have helped them endure.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Stephanie Sy in
Phoenix.